# Things I hate about macOS

I have a kind of love and hate relationship with my work laptop, a MacBook Pro
M2 Pro (what a weird name). I love almost everything about the hardware, from
the premium materials, to the amazing ProMotion screen, to one of the best
speakers I have in my house (no kidding, those speakers are better than some of
my dedicated Bluetooth speakers) and the best touchpad I ever used, period. But
I hate macOS: after using it for work for the last 3 years I got used to its
quirks, but the experience is just so... bad. I could never really point why I
think so, this is why I decided to write about it.

To start: why macOS is so slow for terminal applications? Everything is slower
in macOS compared to my Linux desktop, and this shouldn't be a hardware issue
since my MacBook Pro is probably more powerful and has faster I/O than my
desktop. From opening a new terminal and even typing seems slower. I am using
the exactly same terminal ([Kitty](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/)) and
configuration in both. Just a quick and non-scientific benchmark:


```
$ hyperfine 'zsh -ic exit'
Benchmark 1: zsh -ic exit
  Time (mean ± σ):      94.1 ms ±   2.4 ms    [User: 60.2 ms, System: 34.5 ms]
  Range (min … max):    90.0 ms …  99.0 ms    29 runs

$ hyperfine 'zsh -ci exit'
Benchmark 1: zsh -ci exit
  Time (mean ± σ):     233.0 ms ± 180.9 ms    [User: 54.6 ms, System: 51.0 ms]
  Range (min … max):   153.0 ms … 746.5 ms    10 runs

  Warning: The first benchmarking run for this command was significantly slower than the rest (746.5 ms). This could be caused by (filesystem) caches that were not filled until after the first run. You should consider using the '--warmup' option to fill those caches before the actual benchmark. Alternatively, use the '--prepare' option to clear the caches before each timing run.
```

This may look like a unfair comparison because it seems that I run the macOS
tests with cold cache while I run the Linux tests with a hot cache. However it
is not, this basically matches my experience with macOS where it seems the file
cache expires faster than on Linux. So while on Linux I rarely see ZSH taking
time to start, it is a common occurrence in macOS. But even ignoring this issue
macOS in general seems to be much slower.

Now for one of my major grips about the system: lack of choice. For example, I
want to set my touchpad to use natural (or reverse) scrolling, since well, this
is what we got used after the smartphone boom. But I also want my scroll wheel
to use "normal" scrolling, since this is what years of using a mouse with
scroll made me used to. This is easy to do in any other operating system that
it is not macOS. And the worst thing is that macOS is even deceitful:

[![Mouse](/posts/2025-09-19/Screenshot_2025-09-19_at_13.44.35.png)](/posts/2025-09-19/Screenshot_2025-09-19_at_13.44.35.png)

[![Trackpad](/posts/2025-09-19/Screenshot_2025-09-19_at_13.47.16.png)](/posts/2025-09-19/Screenshot_2025-09-19_at_13.47.16.png)

So you see in the above screenshots that both Mouse and Trakcpad have separate
options for setting "Natural scrolling", but this is a lie: if you change one
of them it changes both, and there is nothing to indicate this. This is so
confusing because before I knew this I would change one option to fix the
current input device that I was using (example, the touchpad), only later once
I use the other device (example, I connected my laptop to my dock and using an
external mouse) it would be working at the opposite way than I expected.

To fix this issue? As far I know, only using an external program. I use [Linear
Mouse](https://linearmouse.app/), that to be clear, it is a great program. It
is just that I shouldn't need to use it, and thanks to the way it works (it
uses Accessibility APIs as far I know) sometimes things get wonky and stops
working.

Another example where macOS refuses to give you choices? Since I have a MacBook
Pro, it has a Touch ID and it works great. Except that I can't use it with a
close lid. No problem, I can just keep the lid of the laptop open. But in macOS
if I keep the lid open I can't turn off the internal display. I don't want that
display to be turned on though, not only it is a waste of energy but also
it means that my mouse can sometimes go to a screen that I am not even
using and this is jarring. The solution? Even another external program:
[BetterDisplay](https://github.com/waydabber/BetterDisplay).

Again, nothing against BetterDisplay that is a really good program. It is just
that I shouldn't need it for something so basic as disabling the internal
screen when I am using an external monitor. BetterDisplay has way more
features, but currently this is the only one I use. The fact that I had to pay
€19.99 for the luxury of turning off the internal display is infuriating.
