# An unordered list of things I miss in Scala

I am starting a new job. Actually started it a few weeks ago, but I think it is
just this week when I started to actually contribute and do something
meaningful (onboarding is always a painful process). And for the first time
ever I am working in a language with an algebraic type system:
[Scala](https://www.scala-lang.org/). It may as well be my excuse to learn
~~about heavy drugs like~~ Rust later, but I digress.

Anyway, it seems that I always end up getting jobs that uses a programming
language that runs in the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), since my last 2 jobs were
with [Clojure](https://clojure.org/) and [Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/). And
while I avoid anything JVM based in my side-projects (I hate the slow startup
of JVM and how anything is complicated to setup), after all those years I
appreciate having a stable platform like JVM running in production.

Well, getting back to the topic: this is another unordered list of things, this
time what I miss from Scala. Keep in mind that my `$CURRENT_JOB` currently uses
Scala 2, and while there are plans to migrate to Scala 3 in future, this is not
the reality yet. It may as well be that some things here are fixed in Scala 3,
I will try my best to cover the basis here, but keep in mind that I am still
new in Scala world.

So this blog post is a list of things that I miss from Scala from other
languages. The list is unordered, because this makes it easier for me to update
in the future if I found something else, but also because I don't want to think
too hard about giving each point here a rank.

With all above, let's start.

## `lateinit var` from Kotlin

It is normal in Java programs that you need to initialise something inside a
class late in the lifecycle of it. A classic example is during test setup,
where you may need to e.g.: initialise a database and you can't do this during
the class initialisation.

In Kotlin you have this `var` modifier called `lateinit`, that can be used as:

```kotlin
class FooTest {
  lateinit var foo: String

  @BeforeEach
  fun setup() {
    foo = "foo"
  }

  fun `test foo`() {
    assertThat(foo.capitalize(), "FOO")
  }
}
```

The advantage may not be obvious in the example above, but let's see how the
class would be without the `lateinit` modifier:

```kotlin
class FooTest {
  var foo: String? = null

  @BeforeEach
  fun setup() {
    foo = "foo"
  }

  @Test
  fun `test foo`() {
    assertThat(foo?.capitalize(), "FOO")
  }
}
```

You see, since Kotlin has
[nullables](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/null-safety.html), it means that if the
compiler can't guarantee that something isn't `null`, it will complain that for
you and you will need to do some kind of check to make sure that reference is
not `null`, like the usage of `.?` operator in the example above.

However, in this particular case I know that every call to `foo` will be safe
since I am initialising the variable in the `setup()` method. This is where
`lateinit` is useful: I am basically instructing the compiler "hey, don't
worry, I will initialise this before usage".

Sadly Scala doesn't support it, so you end up needing to do something like:

```scala
class FooTest with BeforeAndAfter {
  var foo: String = null

  @BeforeEach
  def setup() {
    foo = "foo"
  }

  @Test
  def testFoo() {
    assertThat(foo.capitalize(), "FOO")
  }
}
```

Now it may not seem that bad, because different from Kotlin, Scala still has
`null` values, so there is no need to call `foo` with `?.` everywhere. But now
I can't trust the compiler anymore. I could declare `var foo: Option[String] =
None` instead, but this seems overkill in this case where I know that `setup`
will be called before any assertion in tests.

## Return to labels

Another one from Kotlin, you can early return from any lambda function by
doing:

```kotlin
fun foo() {
  val l = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).map lit@{ v ->
    // in this case you could also use return@map instead of declaring
    // an explicit label
    if (v == 3) return@lit v
  }
  println(l)
}
```

Keep in mind that this is different from a plain `return`, that in that case
would finish the execution of the whole `foo()` method, not only from the
current block. Also, `l` would be assigned with the result from `map`, in this
case it would be `listOf(3)`.

The closest I saw from Scala would be to use a `breakable`:

```scala
def foo() {
  val l = List.empty[Int]
  breakable {
    List.apply(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).map { v =>
      if (v == 3) {
        l.appended(v)
        break()
      }
    }
  }
  println(l)
}
```

Now, keep in mind that the example above would be much better written with
e.g.: `filter()`, so it is not a realistic example. But it is just to
illustrate why I think return to labels is a neat feature from Kotlin, and
why I would like something similar in Scala.
