# KDE is now my favorite desktop

From [my last blog
post](/posts/2025-09-15/01-from-gaming-rig-to-personal-computer-my-journey-with-nixos-and-jovian.md),
I am now using KDE as the desktop environment for my gaming rig. The reason is
because I want a reasonably easy to use Linux desktop for when my wife needs to
use the PC for something other than gaming, and this was the reason why my
"traditional" [Sway](https://swaywm.org/) setup was a no-go.

But, after using KDE for a while I am starting to really appreciate how good it
is. And no, this is not compared to other Linux desktops, but also with both
Windows and macOS (that I need to use often, especially the later since my job
gave me a MacBook Pro).

To start, KDE is surprisingly feature-complete. For example, the network applet
gives lots of information that in other operational systems are either not
available or difficult to access. It is easy to see in the screenshot below:

[![Wi-Fi information available in the network applet from
KDE](/posts/2025-09-17/Screenshot_20250917_191837.png)](/posts/2025-09-17/Screenshot_20250917_191837.png)

You can see things like channel, signal strength, frequency, MAC address, BSSID
address (so the MAC address of the router). It even includes a handy button to
share the Wi-Fi information via QR code, so you can easily setup a new mobile
device like Android.

By the way, the crop and blur from that screenshot above? I made everything
using the integrated screenshot tool. I didn't need to open an external
application even once. It is also really smart, I need to redo this screenshot
a few times and it kept the cropping to the exact area I was taking the
screenshot before.

Another example, I wanted [Steam](https://steamcommunity.com/) to start
automatically with the system, but it has the bad habit of putting its main
window at the top. Really annoying since it sometimes ended up stealing up the
focus. However KDE has this "Window Rules" feature inside "Window Management"
settings where you can pretty much control whatever you want about application
windows. Really useful tool.

KDE also has lots of really well integrated tools. For example, I am using some
Flatpak applications and I can easily configure the permissions via System
Settings. Or if I want hardware information like
[SMART](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-Monitoring,_Analysis_and_Reporting_Technology)
status, I can just open Info Center. I can prevent the screen and computer to
sleep at the click of a button (something that in both Windows and macOS I need
to install a separate program). The list goes on, I keep getting surprised how
many things that I used to need a third-party program that KDE just has
available by default.

[![Flatpak permission
management](/posts/2025-09-17/Screenshot_20250917_192302.png)](/posts/2025-09-17/Screenshot_20250917_192302.png)

But not only KDE is fully featured, it is also fast. Now to be clear, this is
a completely subjective analysis but I find KDE faster than Windows 11 in the
same hardware, especially for things integrated in the system itself. For
example, while opening Windows settings it can take a few seconds after a cold
boot, the KDE's System Settings is pretty much instantaneous. Even compared
with macOS in my MacBook Pro M2 Pro (that is of course comparing Apples and
Bananas), KDE just feels snappier. I actually can't find much difference
between KDE and my Sway setup to be honest, except maybe for the heavy use of
animations (that can be disabled, but I ended up liking it after a while).

I will not say KDE is perfect though. At the first launch I got one issue where
it started without the task bar because I connected this PC to both my monitor
and TV, but the TV is used exclusively for gaming. However, KDE considered my
TV the primary desktop and put the task bar only in that monitor, and even
disabling the TV didn't add the task bar to my monitor. Easily fixed by
manually adding a task bar, but an annoying problem (especially when you're not
used to the desktop). There were also a few other minor issues that I don't
remember right now.

After using KDE for about a week I can say that this is the first time that I
really enjoy a desktop environment on Linux, after all those years. Props for
the KDE developers for making the experience so good.

[![About this System](/posts/2025-09-17/Screenshot_20250917_195215.png)](/posts/2025-09-17/Screenshot_20250917_195215.png)
