# Making a blog for the next 10 years

So one thing that I realise after starting writing this blog is that I care
more about it than some of my other projects. For some reason or another I want
to make sure that this blog will continue with me for a long time. This is one
of the reasons why I use [GitHub as mirror
blog](/posts/2024-07-26/02-using-github-as-a-bad-blog-platform.md) and why I
created a [bunch of
automation](/posts/2024-07-29/01-quick-bits-why-you-should-automate-everything.md)
to make sure I never forget how to maintain this blog.

Still, there are a bunch of dependencies that I need to make sure they're
working so I can publish blog posts:

- Markdown renderer
- A text editor
- [Makefile](/posts/2024-08-13/01-abusing-makefiles-for-fun-and-profit.md)
- Shell script
- Go compiler and dependencies

Let's start with the most important one: the texts themselves, they're all
written in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/). The nice thing about
Markdown is that it is just plain text files with some special notation that
allow you to format text, but the text itself is still legible even if you have
no support to render Markdowns. So it means as long as I can read a plain text
file, I can still read the posts, no issue there. Closely related issue here is
the text editor, but the nice thing about Markdown is that if tomorrow I decide
to change from `neovim` to, say, [Zed](https://zed.dev/), I can still write it
Markdown files without issue.

For shell script and Makefile I decided that they're less of an issue if they
eventually stop working: they're only used to make my life easier, but I can
still create files manually if needed. Still, I tried to rewrite both the
[shell](https://github.com/thiagokokada/blog/commit/a0d421ca90f3da059998295c5e3c6c7a6a3f0688)
and
[Makefile](https://github.com/thiagokokada/blog/commit/074580065b21fbdaf930aa51968e69f015d49505)
to avoid GNUisms, so in the eventual case that I decide to e.g.: stop using a
GNU/Linux system like NixOS and use a *BSD system instead, I am covered.

**WIP** Now about Go: `go mod vendor`.

**WIP** Some other minor issues, like making sure the links are still working:
I could have some validation checking if those links are still online, or I
could just always post from archive.org.
