# Abusing Makefiles for fun and profit

If you are following this blog for a while, it should be no surprise that most
of the workflow in this blog is [automated using
Go](/2024-07-29/01-quick-bits-why-you-should-automate-everything.md). I
basically write Markdown files with some special rules inside the
[repository](https://github.com/thiagokokada/blog), commit and push it. In
seconds, the CI (currently [GitHub
Actions](https://github.com/thiagokokada/blog/blob/4e3f25485c6682f3e066b219df2290934bc0d256/.github/workflows/go.yml))
will take the latest commit, generate some files (since I use the [repository
itself](/2024-07-26/02-using-github-as-a-bad-blog-platform.md) as a backup
blog) and publish to the [capivaras.dev
website](https://kokada.capivaras.dev/).

Now, considering how much about Nix I talk in this blog, it should be a
surprise that the workflow above has **zero** Nix code inside it. I am not
saying this blog will never have it, but I am only going to add if this is
necessary, for example if I start using a tool to build this blog that I
generally don't expect it to be installed by the machine I am currently using.
Go is an exception of this rule since it is relatively straightfoward to
install (just download the [binary](https://go.dev/doc/install)) and because
its [stability guarantee](https://go.dev/doc/go1compat) means (hopefully) no
breakage. But most other things I consider moving targets, and would not be
comfortable to use unless I have Nix to ensure reproducibility.

This is why the other tool that this blog (ab)uses during its workflow is
[`Make`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software)), one of the oldest
build automations software that exist. It is basically available in any *nix
(do not confuse with [Nix](https://nixos.org/)) system, from most Linux distros
to macOS, by default. So it is the tool I choose to automatise some tasks in
this blog, even if I consider writing a `Makefile` (the DSL that `Make` uses)
kind of a dark art.

To be clear, the idea of this post is not to be a `Makefile` tutorial. You can
find a good one [here](https://makefiletutorial.com/). Also, while I am using
`Make` thanks to the reasons above, you can use many other tools for a similar
objective, like [Justfiles](https://github.com/casey/just),
[Taskfiles](https://taskfile.dev/) (sadly it uses
[YAML](/2024-07-31/01-generating-yaml-files-with-nix.md)), or even a small
script written in any language you want. The reason that I am writing this post
is why you should do it, not how.
